README.md, before:

# reru

**reru** is a high-performance, drop-in replacement for Python's `re` module, powered by Rust.

It combines the raw speed of Rust's linear-time regex engine with the flexibility of backtracking engines when necessary. `reru` intelligently analyzes your regex pattern and automatically selects the most efficient engine for the job.

## 🚀 Features

* **Hybrid Engine Architecture**:
    * **Fast Path**: Uses the `regex` crate (linear time `O(n)`) for standard patterns, ensuring protection against ReDoS (Regular Expression Denial of Service).
    * **Feature Path**: Automatically switches to `fancy-regex` for patterns requiring look-arounds (`(?=...)`, `(?<=...)`) or backreferences (`\1`), maintaining compatibility with Python's standard regex features.
* **Global Caching**: Compilations are cached efficiently using a thread-safe `DashMap`, making repeated calls lightning fast across threads.
* **High Performance**: Implemented purely in Rust using `pyo3` and `maturin`.
* **Rich API**: Supports standard methods like `match`, `search`, `findall`, and `sub`, plus named capture groups.
* **Global Caching**: Compilations are cached efficiently using a thread-safe `DashMap`, making repeated calls lightning fast across threads.
* **Type Safe**: Includes full type hints (`.pyi`) for better IDE integration and static analysis.
* **Cross-Platform**: Pre-built wheels available for Linux (x86_64, aarch64, armv7, musl), macOS (Intel & Apple Silicon), and Windows (x64, x86, arm64).

## 📦 Installation

Install `reru` easily via pip:

```bash
pip install reru

```

## 🛠 Usage

`reru` exposes a simple API similar to Python's standard `re` module. Functions are available directly at the module level for optimized dispatch.

### Basic Matching and Searching

```python
import reru

# Check if a pattern matches (returns bool)
if reru.is_match(r"\d+", "The answer is 42"):
    print("It's a match!")

# Search for a pattern (returns a Match object or None)
match = reru.search(r"(\w+) world", "hello world")
if match:
    print(f"Full match: {match.group()}") # "hello world"
    print(f"Start index: {match.start()}") # 0
    print(f"End index: {match.end()}")     # 11

# Optimized usage
RE1 = reru.compile(r"\d+")
RE1.is_match("The answer is 42")
RE2 = reru.compile(r"(\w+) world")
RE2.search("hello world")
```

### Named Groups and New Methods
`reru` now supports named capture groups, `findall`, and `sub` (substitution).



```python
import reru

# Named Groups
match = reru.match(r"(?P<year>\d{4})-(?P<month>\d{2})", "2024-05")
if match:
    print(match.group("year"))  # "2024"
    print(match.group(1))       # "2024"

# Find All Matches
results = reru.findall(r"\d+", "Items: 10, 20, 30")
print(results) # ['10', '20', '30']

# Substitution
text = reru.sub(r"ERROR", "CRITICAL", "System status: ERROR")
print(text) # "System status: CRITICAL"
```

### Advanced Configuration
You can fine-tune the regex engine using `ReConfig`. This allows you to control case sensitivity, multiline modes, whitespace ignoring, and execution limits.


```python
import reru

# Named Groups
match = reru.match(r"(?P<year>\d{4})-(?P<month>\d{2})", "2024-05")
if match:
    print(match.group("year"))  # "2024"
    print(match.group(1))       # "2024"

# Find All Matches
results = reru.findall(r"\d+", "Items: 10, 20, 30")
print(results) # ['10', '20', '30']

# Substitution
text = reru.sub(r"ERROR", "CRITICAL", "System status: ERROR")
print(text) # "System status: CRITICAL"
```

### Engine Selection (Advanced)
If you need to force a specific engine (ignoring the auto-detection), you can use `compile_custom`:
```
from reru import SelectEngine, compile_custom

# Force the Standard Rust engine (strictly linear time)
pat = compile_custom(r"\d+", select_engine=SelectEngine.Std)
```


## ⚙️ How It Works

Under the hood, `reru` inspects the byte-code of your pattern before compilation:

1. **Inspection**: It checks for "expensive" features like look-aheads, look-behinds, and backreferences.
2. **Selection**:
* If expensive features are **absent**, it uses Rust's `regex` crate. This guarantees linear time execution and is generally faster.
* If expensive features are **present**, it falls back to `fancy-regex`. This supports the complex features Python developers expect while still benefiting from Rust's optimizations where possible.



## 💻 Development

To build `reru` from source, you will need **Rust** and **uv** (or `maturin`) installed.

1. **Clone the repository**:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/berrytern/reru.git
cd reru

```


2. **Setup environment**:
```bash
uv venv
source .venv/bin/activate
uv sync

```


3. **Build and install**:
```bash
maturin develop --release

```


## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the Apache License 2.0. See the [LICENSE](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.txt) file for details.

## 👥 Authors

* **João Pedro Miranda C. Hluchan** - *Initial work* - [berrytern](https://github.com/berrytern)

Commit message:

docs: update explanation of fallback strategy in README for performance and compatibility

README.md, after:

# reru

**reru** is a high-performance, drop-in replacement for Python's `re` module, powered by Rust.

It combines the raw speed of Rust's linear-time regex engine with the flexibility of backtracking engines when necessary. `reru` intelligently analyzes your regex pattern and automatically selects the most efficient engine for the job.

## 🚀 Features

* **Hybrid Engine Architecture**:
    * **Fast Path**: Uses the `regex` crate (linear time `O(n)`) for standard patterns, ensuring protection against ReDoS (Regular Expression Denial of Service).
    * **Feature Path**: Automatically switches to `fancy-regex` for patterns requiring look-arounds (`(?=...)`, `(?<=...)`) or backreferences (`\1`), maintaining compatibility with Python's standard regex features.
* **Global Caching**: Compilations are cached efficiently using a thread-safe `DashMap`, making repeated calls lightning fast across threads.
* **High Performance**: Implemented purely in Rust using `pyo3` and `maturin`.
* **Rich API**: Supports standard methods like `match`, `search`, `findall`, and `sub`, plus named capture groups.
* **Global Caching**: Compilations are cached efficiently using a thread-safe `DashMap`, making repeated calls lightning fast across threads.
* **Type Safe**: Includes full type hints (`.pyi`) for better IDE integration and static analysis.
* **Cross-Platform**: Pre-built wheels available for Linux (x86_64, aarch64, armv7, musl), macOS (Intel & Apple Silicon), and Windows (x64, x86, arm64).

## 📦 Installation

Install `reru` easily via pip:

```bash
pip install reru

```

## 🛠 Usage

`reru` exposes a simple API similar to Python's standard `re` module. Functions are available directly at the module level for optimized dispatch.

### Basic Matching and Searching

```python
import reru

# Check if a pattern matches (returns bool)
if reru.is_match(r"\d+", "The answer is 42"):
    print("It's a match!")

# Search for a pattern (returns a Match object or None)
match = reru.search(r"(\w+) world", "hello world")
if match:
    print(f"Full match: {match.group()}") # "hello world"
    print(f"Start index: {match.start()}") # 0
    print(f"End index: {match.end()}")     # 11

# Optimized usage
RE1 = reru.compile(r"\d+")
RE1.is_match("The answer is 42")
RE2 = reru.compile(r"(\w+) world")
RE2.search("hello world")
```

### Named Groups and New Methods
`reru` now supports named capture groups, `findall`, and `sub` (substitution).



```python
import reru

# Named Groups
match = reru.match(r"(?P<year>\d{4})-(?P<month>\d{2})", "2024-05")
if match:
    print(match.group("year"))  # "2024"
    print(match.group(1))       # "2024"

# Find All Matches
results = reru.findall(r"\d+", "Items: 10, 20, 30")
print(results) # ['10', '20', '30']

# Substitution
text = reru.sub(r"ERROR", "CRITICAL", "System status: ERROR")
print(text) # "System status: CRITICAL"
```

### Advanced Configuration
You can fine-tune the regex engine using `ReConfig`. This allows you to control case sensitivity, multiline modes, whitespace ignoring, and execution limits.


```python
import reru

# Named Groups
match = reru.match(r"(?P<year>\d{4})-(?P<month>\d{2})", "2024-05")
if match:
    print(match.group("year"))  # "2024"
    print(match.group(1))       # "2024"

# Find All Matches
results = reru.findall(r"\d+", "Items: 10, 20, 30")
print(results) # ['10', '20', '30']

# Substitution
text = reru.sub(r"ERROR", "CRITICAL", "System status: ERROR")
print(text) # "System status: CRITICAL"
```

### Engine Selection (Advanced)
If you need to force a specific engine (ignoring the auto-detection), you can use `compile_custom`:
```
from reru import SelectEngine, compile_custom

# Force the Standard Rust engine (strictly linear time)
pat = compile_custom(r"\d+", select_engine=SelectEngine.Std)
```


## ⚙️ How It Works

reru uses a "Try-Fail" fallback strategy to ensure the best balance between performance and compatibility:

1. **Inspection**: It checks for "expensive" features like look-aheads, look-behinds, and backreferences.
2. **Selection**:
* If expensive features are **absent**, it uses Rust's `regex` crate. This guarantees linear time execution and is generally faster.
* If expensive features are **present**, it falls back to `fancy-regex`. This supports the complex features Python developers expect while still benefiting from Rust's optimizations where possible.



## 💻 Development

To build `reru` from source, you will need **Rust** and **uv** (or `maturin`) installed.

1. **Clone the repository**:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/berrytern/reru.git
cd reru

```


2. **Setup environment**:
```bash
uv venv
source .venv/bin/activate
uv sync

```


3. **Build and install**:
```bash
maturin develop --release

```


## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the Apache License 2.0. See the [LICENSE](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.txt) file for details.

## 👥 Authors

* **João Pedro Miranda C. Hluchan** - *Initial work* - [berrytern](https://github.com/berrytern)
